All right now it's finally time to do the hard part.
We're going to write our own algorithm that will find the lowest cost.
And this is the famous gradient descent algorithm and gradient is well you guessed it just another word
for slope.
So I'm going to give you a very very Austrian perspective to think about the gradient descent algorithm.
You know we've got a lot of mountains back in Austria and they're very very beautiful and you can go
ski down them but a mountain is a force of nature.
You have to respect the mountains you see the weather can change very very quickly and this is especially
unpredictable in winter.
And at high altitude.
So you know imagine yourself that you've wandered off the beaten track and the fall comes rolling in.
And at this point you find yourself in a survival situation.
This is when you can't see very far and you can only feel the ground beneath your feet.
The cold is going to be creeping in through your jacket and you find yourself thinking how do I get
down.
How do I get back down wealth to figure out which way is down and towards that hot cup of tea waiting
for you at the end of your journey.
You got a feel like.
Which way is down.
What is the slope right.
You're going to look at your feet and you're going to figure out that the fastest way down is in the
direction where the slope is steepest.
Right where the descent is the most steep.
And if you take a step downwards in that direction and then kind of get a feel for it again like which
way which way is the slope and then take another step where the slope is steepest you'll be down in
that valley in no time.
And you can sit on that hot cup of tea right.
And this is how you can think about gradient descent except instead of a mountain Yeah gradient descent
is going to take place on a cost function and the cost function actually doesn't tend to look like this.
It doesn't kind of have a peak if you will.
Right.
Because of a function had a peak then it would be called concave.
It has a maximum.
But with our cost functions we're going to be looking for minimums.
Right.
So if you imagine that mountain flipped upside down and all you've got is a valley.
That you have to kind of find then your cost function is going to look more like this.
This is a kind of function that's called convex.
It will have a minimum and a hard job is to get to the bottom of it because that's where the cost is
lowest.
Now gradient descent isn't always called gradient descent.
There's another word for it that you might see as well in the literature.
Sometimes it's referred to as steepest descent and yes it's an optimization algorithm for finding the
minimum of a function.
So you know think about our mountain example to find the minimum the function takes these little steps.
Right.
It takes a step in that direction where the slope is steepest in the direction of the negative of the
gradient and bit by bit ends up in the bottom of the valley.
All right.
So let's implement this and Jupiter notebook.
Let's add another markdown cell here.
And the cell cell type markdown down and put two hash tags there for a section heading and that section
heading is gonna be Python loops and gradient descent.
Now if you're a seasoned programmer you're gonna be familiar with writing loops but if you're new to
Python or your new programming then the next couple of minutes are going to be the introduction to this
topic of loops loops are little bits of code that are executed over and over again.
We're going to walk down that mountain.
We're going to walk down into the valley with our gradient descent algorithm.
So this is going to be a very very useful tool for accomplishing that because our algorithm has to complete
that famous three step process.
Right.
Predict calculate error and learn and repeat.
So instead of writing the same Python instructions over and over again we're going to be using loops
to simplify that for us.
Speaking of four this is the first loop I'm going to introduce to you guys.
So this is gonna be the for loop in Python so I'll just write a little commentary Python for loop and
this is what the syntax looks like if the keyword for.
And then there's gonna be a variable in this case I'm gonna call it and and then then other keyword
in and then I'm going to say range parentheses five colon new line and now we're inside the loop here
we're gonna print famous first words hello world.
OK let's shift and turn.
See what happens.
All right.
So we've printed hello world five times.
Right.
One two three four five.
If I change this range to three l print it three times if I change it to a thousand l printed a thousand
times but let's stick to the stick to five for the time being and let's take a closer look at this value
end here.
Right.
And is just a variable and it's going to keep track of how often are for loop has run.
So if I say hello world comma and then I can see what the value is of the variable and each time the
loop is run.
So it starts at zero.
Programmers like to start counting from zero.
And that's the very first time the loop runs.
Then this print statement is executed another time.
So second time third time fourth time fifth time.
And at this point the loop stops.
Right.
Show you that print.
End of loop.
So the python program will come in here.
They'll execute whatever's inside the loop and you can tell what's inside.
By the spacing a predefined number of times in this case five times.
Right.
Zero one two three four.
Now we can call a little counter variable here and we can call it I.
This is another one that is often used.
So I call it I get exactly the same result.
It really doesn't matter what do you call it.
You can call it counter as long as you're consistent.
You can access the variable the looping counter inside of the loop by its name all right.
So that's the that's the for loop.
It executes a predefined number of times and it's got this very very simple syntax for an in range.
And then some number here.
So this is how often times you want to execute the loop with that out of the way.
Let me show you another type of loop this type of loop is also very very common.
And this is the so-called while loop
a while loop works a little differently.
Right.
It has a condition that it checks every time it runs right.
So it will check the condition and then if that condition holds it's going to run the code inside the
loop and it's going to continue doing that until the condition fails.
So if I have a counter and I say it's equal to zero and then I can write my while loop like this I can
see while which is a key word and see counter is smaller than I don't know what seven colon print
counting
counter.
So print the value of my counter inside my loop and then I'll say counter as equal to counter plus one.
So I'm going to increment my counter variable by 1 every time the loop runs.
And then when I finished with the loop I'll print something else.
Yeah.
Ready or not here I come.
Yeah let's make that loop a little bit more menacing than the last one.
So for hit shift enter now I can see my print statement inside my loop executed seven times.
Right starts at zero and executed until our condition fails.
This is the condition so whatever follows the while keyword is the condition that's checked.
And this fails when counter is equal to seven.
Seven is equal to seven it's not smaller than seven.
So this will be false at this point.
The loop terminates and the code inside is not executed anymore.
And we jump to our print statement below.
Write this one ready or not here I come.
And this is what we're seeing here.
Again I can accomplish the very very same thing as with the for loop so I can executed five times.
So if you want You can also execute a while loop a predefined number of times.
Yeah there's a small catch that's a small Gotcha.
That can happen with while loops that you won't get with for loops.
Hey guess what this gotchas any guess what it is that can trip you up and where you can shoot yourself
in the foot
so with while loops you can get into a situation where they don't stop where they don't terminate.
So for example if I had made a typo here and instead of that plus I had hit minus then my loop would
actually run forever right because it would start at a zero.
Then when it reaches this line my counter would go to negative 1 then would come here and go to negative
2 and then we can hang in negative 3.
And this thing would just continue going right.
Which is clearly not my intention right it would continue going and cause a lot of problems.
So with while loops you have to be careful that you don't accidentally write an infinite loop.
So for loops by their very nature run a predefined number of times while loops run while a certain condition
holds true.
And this is where you gotta be gotta be careful so with your while loops you can make sure they terminate
and the easiest way to remember this is with an old programming joke.
Yeah that goes something like this.
A programmer once said to his wife Honey I'm heading to the supermarket to buy some groceries to which
his wife responded while you're there buy some milk.
And alas he never returned home again.
Oh.
Crickets.
Back to gradient descent.
Let's tackle that in the new cell here at the bottom.
The thing with gradient descent is that we need a couple of ingredients right.
We need a starting point.
Then we need a learning rate and we're gonna need some maybe temporary value to hold onto something
while our program is executing.
So I'm gonna create these three things here.
When I say new X which is gonna be our starting point I set it equal to three when to start with the
three as the starting point.
A previous X and this is gonna be my temp value if you will.
That only matters inside of the loop.
And then I'm going to also specify a learning rate.
Yeah.
Or gamma or whatever you call it.
So I'll call it a step multiplier
and I'll set it equal to zero point one now it's time to write that loop.
It's gonna be a for loop for us so we'll see for and in range and maybe start at 30.
Colon.
And now for the first step.
What's the first thing that we have to do.
Well we have to make a guess right.
We have to make some prediction.
This is step one of the machine learning process.
So when you take our time value previous on a score X and set equal to our random guess.
Yeah.
New X equals three.
Three was a random guess just our starting point for our gradient descent.
It's going to set them equal to each other.
Now we get to step two step two is calculating the error because we need to know how far off we were
from the previous lesson.
You will know that the steepness of the slope tells us how far off we are right from the minimum because
at the minimum the slope is equal to zero.
And everywhere else it's equal to some number that that isn't zero.
So our gradient is gonna be equal to D F of the previous X..
Yeah.
So we're gonna call our derivative function when I pass in the tenth value.
So at the point where we are in our function and in a store the the slope yeah at this point in a variable
called gradient so one thing you might ask at this point is why is calculating the gradient.
Step two were calculating the arrow.
What's the link between those two things.
And the way to think about it is that the further away we are from our minimum the steeper our slope.
So if the slope is very very steep then it's indicative of being very very far away from where we want
to be a steep slope means that we've got a high error.
And if the slope is zero or close to it then our era is small.
And now it's time for that adjustment step for that learning step.
So the new value of X is gonna be equal to the previous value of X minus because we get to go down the
hill minus our step multiplier
times the slope times the gradient and remember this is the value of the slope at the previous value
of x.
So what we're doing here is we're taking a step that's proportional to the negative of the gradient
of the function at the point that we're at.
And then we're subtracting from the previous x value because we want to move against the gradient towards
the minimum and this is where the learning in machine learning takes place.
So this loop is going to run 30 times and after it's finished let's print out our results.
So I say the local minimum occurs at
at what Well the new value of X right.
Because that's what we're updating in our for loop and we're gonna print out the slope.
Yeah.
So we just have to make sure our slope is close to zero.
Right.
Or the value of D of F of X..
Yeah.
So uh while you're at this point.
So this is gonna be our derivative function and as an input it's gonna get the latest value of x finally
when I print out what the what the cost is at this point.
So this is the f of x value or cost at this point is
and this is gonna be our cost function at the point where the cost is lowest now before I run this.
Make sure you've got a plus sign here because if you ever have to go to restart and run all or run all
above.
Yeah.
Then you may want to make sure that this loop doesn't continue going.
I just caught myself out there.
So his shift into now here and I get my print statements shooting off the results of our gradient descent.
So what can we learn from this.
What can we deduce from the values that we're seeing here.
Well the first thing is that we can see that they're approximations right.
This isn't an exact value.
We're not getting a very clean answer here.
But that might be the case because maybe we haven't run our loop often enough.
So if I increase the value here from say 30 to 50 let's see what happens with our values that we get
printed out so one thing that we're seeing is that our slope is getting a lot closer to zero here than
before.
The second thing is is that this value here on f of x is also getting a lot more precise and so is our
new value of x.
So it's getting much much closer to a minus zero point five.
Yeah if I run this 500 times let's see what happens.
So as you can see we're converging on this local minimum by brute force right.
We didn't solve our cost function here analytically.
What we're doing is we're iterating and going down that valley that cost function.
Until we reach the minimum point and at the minimum our slope is equal to zero.
Our cost is equal to zero point seven five.
And this is when the x is equal to minus zero point five.
So obviously you can run this thing a thousand times or what have you.
Right.
But often times you actually know ahead of time how precise a calculation you need right from the resource
management point of view.
What you can actually do is you can tell the loop to stop running once a certain level of precision
is met.
And I'm sure you're looking up.
Yeah.
You scrolling up and you looking at this while loop here and you're thinking ah yeah the Y loop seems
ideal for this right.
We can run the while loop as long as our calculation is within a certain level of precision and you'd
be right.
That's exactly something you could implement if you wanted to with the structure of the while loop.
Let me show you how to do this with the for loop as well.
We're going to modify our code here a little bit to include a cutoff point for a certain level of precision
and the way I'm going to do this is by adding another variable up top the same precision.
It's gonna be equal to zero point zero zero zero one.
Yeah.
So this is how precise I want my answer to be.
Now where did this come into play.
Well what we're interested in in with our precision estimate is what's the difference between the new
X and the old X right.
So if those two are getting closer and closer and closer together then our calculation is getting much
more precise.
So what we can do is we can say well the step size is gonna be the difference between our new X minus
our previous X..
Yeah that's gonna be the step size.
And just to make sure that step sizes is always a positive number we're going to say well what we care
about is actually the absolute value of our step size and uh no change the number of times this loop
runs to maybe 10.
Yeah.
And I'm going to print out the step size just we can see how it it evolves over time as the as the loop
runs.
So let me run this.
Let me press shift enter here.
And we can see here our step size initially starts out with zero point seven.
And then it decreases.
Right.
The new X and the old X are getting closer and closer together.
So we can see here our step size is decreasing.
Coming up this print statement so it doesn't execute anymore.
And I'm going to add the condition for terminating this for loop.
Yeah I'm going to say well if the step size is smaller than the precision.
So in other words if the difference between the new X and the previous x is smaller than zero point
0 0 0 1 then we can terminate our loop then we can stop with our calculations.
So put a column there and then the python keyword for stopping this loop.
It's called break.
We'll leave it at that.
And uh I'm going to say well run 500 times.
Yeah for loop run from zero to 500 but if the step size is smaller than our predetermined precision
then stop running let's see how often our loop runs according to this logic.
Well we don't know right.
Could have run any number of times we probably have to print the value of an SO print loop run this
many times
got this.
So given these constraints our loop ran 40 times.
It's actually not that much.
Not that many times.
If we add an extra zero here on the position that we're looking for and press shift and to again we
can see that it ran 50 times so it actually never gets up to 500.
Yeah.
Doesn't doesn't go up all that way and that's because it reaches that terminating condition.
This brake statement a lot sooner but still the way we wrote this code we have two conditions where
it can stop.
It can either reach 500 and it will stop there or when it reaches the minimum and that step size becomes
very very very small.
Then it can also terminate now running the python loop and calculating the minimum is very well and
good but I'm a very very visual person and I'm sure you might be too.
So I find graphing things very very helpful the way we're gonna go about graphing it is.
First off we have to kind of keep track of all the values that we've calculated inside of our loop.
So we're going to create two lists.
Yeah.
Two Python lists one of them is going to hold onto our X values.
So it's gonna be a list and it's going to contain the new X values and the other thing is I'm going
to also create a list for all the slopes.
So I'm going to call this slope list and it's going to contain whatever value our derivative has at
this exposition.
Yeah.
Now within our loop we're actually doing these calculations anyhow.
So all we need to do is we need to spend the x values and the slope values to our list.
So I see X list dot append to add a new value to it of the new x value.
And this is the x value that we've updated after we've taken our step down the cost function.
So going to pen this value to our list and also for our slope list we're going to append
the output from our derivative function at the new x value.
Yeah.
And that's it.
That gives us the basis for plotting out charts.
So let's do that now.
I'm gonna go up here and I'm actually going to copy this cell here to edit copy cell and when I reuse
it down here a lot of this code.
So in a pace the cell above I find when I edit my comment to uh say that we're gonna superimpose the
gradient descent calculations.
Yeah
so this is the goal now we've got two charts and we're gonna do is we're gonna add a scatter plot on
top of these with the data that we've captured from our loop.
Here's how we're gonna do it
for our first chart.
We're gonna say PDT dots scatter parentheses and then we have to supply some arguments.
So on the x axis it's gonna be our list of x values and for our y axis we want to feed our list of values
into our cost function.
Right.
So this is our F of X..
Now you might think I can actually just put the X list in here and press shift enter but this isn't
going to work when I get an error.
Yeah and this is because our function the way that we've written it cannot process a list.
It's unable to process this list as it is.
So I'm gonna have to do a little type conversion first so I'm going to create a variable called values
and set it equal to a num pi array which is gonna take as an argument our list of x values.
So our function can work with an array but it can't work with a list and to press shift enter we should
see that now we have a list kind of plant on top of our graph.
But in terms of data visualization that was very very poor.
Right.
So I'm going to say the color of these dots should be red.
They should be a lot larger so that the signs equal to maybe 100 and give them a little bit of transparency.
So when I say the alpha should be equal to maybe zero point six.
See how that looks.
It's looking a lot better.
Yeah.
So we can see here as our algorithm runs going closer and closer to this minimum but we can also show
this on our second chart as well.
Right.
So we can see how we're inching closer to where the slope is zero on this right hand chart and we can
do that by making use of the other list that we've captured.
So in this case it is a little bit simpler because we just have to write peel t scatter parentheses
x list x values still the same but for the Y of how use we've done a bit of a calculation already so
we can say slope on the score list
and let's also make it a red color
make the dots big size one hundred and alpha zero point five or something.
Let's see how it goes.
It's looking not bad but I do wonder if there maybe should be some transparency on the line itself.
So if this thing had an alpha of say zero point six would it look a bit better yeah.
Yeah this looks this looks better do the same thing with our plot at the top as well.
Let's give this an alpha of zero point maybe six as well.
See or zero point seven perhaps
zero point eight.
Try.
Yeah.
This is looking pretty good.
So you can see here that now we have our scatter plot superimposed on our derivative function and it
stops when the slope is equal to zero.
And on the regular cost function we're moving down and down and down and down into the minimum at the
bottom of this parabola.
You know the cool thing is that we can even zoom in a little bit and we can even do a little close up
of our slope.
Let me show you what I mean.
So if I take this bit of code here copied and pasted and say chart number three and call this the rid
of
close up and then I change the title and say gradient descent close up might get rid of the Y level
don't need that to keep the grid but I'm going to change what's on the axes and go from say zero point
five five to minus zero point two.
So zooming in here on the x axis and on the y axis I'm going to do the same.
When I zoom in from zero point three to zero point eight I'm still gonna leave it sky blue.
Change the line with two six four zero point eight.
Change these values around a little bit to make it a bit more distinct and make the dots a little bigger.
And if a press shift enter now then nothing will happen because I need to adjust my subplot.
Right.
I'm adding a third plot here.
So I have to make sure that I have in this case what three columns right I've got three chance.
This is chart number three of the lot.
And this is gonna be also edited to chart number two right.
On the three column subplot and same with us as this chart number one on the three column subplot.
And it's now that I can run this.
See what happens.
Huh.
So I'd say this is pretty good right.
We've got a close up here where we can actually watch the gradient descent converge upon that zero value.
And you can see those steps getting smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller as we're getting closer
to our goal.
I think this is incredibly cool.
The charts look a little bit squished.
Maybe what I'll do is I'll change this from 15 to I don't know 20 on the width.
See if that helps yeah that definitely looks a little better.
Okay brilliant.
We've done a quite a lot of work in this lesson.
This has been a long and difficult lesson but writing the code definitely helps us play around with
the gradient descent.
Yeah because what we can do now is we can change a couple of these values and see how it behaves differently.
So for example if instead of at three we start at minus three with our gradient descent.
Let's take a look here.
If I starting value is minus three and I rerun the loop and rerun all the calculations and rerun the
graphs then we can see how the gradient descent comes in from the other side.
So in this case it's from the bottom here instead of from the top.
This is really really cool in being able to actually play with the algorithm.
And this is the advantage of writing all the code out and actually running it and rerunning it to see
how differently it behaves because not only can we change the starting point but we can also change
see how many steps we're taking right.
So if we rerun our algorithm to only run about 10 times instead of the usual amount then we can see
how we're not getting that close to the minimum.
All right.
So we should be getting about here but we're actually not reaching it.
So yeah I think this is really really cool.
And in the next couple of lessons we're going to be exploring a couple more of the idiosyncrasies and
the strengths and weaknesses of this algorithm.
Now that we've written it and graft it I'll see you there.